welcome to Clearwater Florida and the
spiritual headquarters of the
controversial Church of Scientology but
this is a place where we're not welcome
we are trying to find out why serious
allegations against this church refused
to go away they include disturbing
practices like splitting up families
verbal and physical abuse even holding
employees prisoner but Scientologists
take extreme measures to avoid external
scrutiny measures it seemed that come at
the direction of their leader the
mysterious David Miscavige who is at the
center of the church's greatest mystery
of all the whereabouts of his wife
Shelly missing now for 13 years we're
driving through this remote mountain
range on the trail of missing woman
Shelly Miscavige we certainly feel like
you're away from civilization up here
don't you yeah the beauty here is
matched only by the isolation making
this the perfect hideaway or hiding spot
this is as secret as it gets
most Scientologists had no idea existed
and and according to whistleblower Tony
Ortega this is where Shelly could well
be in a secret compound that is also
home to a doomsday vault
no matter how beautiful the setting it
just seems cool Shelly is the high
priestess of Scientology who vanished 13
years ago while the church won't speak
of it the belief is Shelly has been
banished to this mountain prison by her
husband the leader of the church the
all-powerful David Miscavige
I think there are a couple places where
david miscavige puts people and this is
one of them
shellie she'll never be free your
daughter-in-law my daughter-in-law
tonight David Miscavige's own father Ron
Miscavige gives candid insight into his
son's cruelty do you think he has the
ability the will to order his wife be
locked away absolutely there's no
question about it
next stop infinity I know it's difficult
to believe but the worst thing about
this is I'm telling you the truth
that's the worst goddamn thing that's
going on in this interview this happens
these are pretty bad people but they
don't have a conscience and that that
lets them do it we barely embarked on
our story when we got this seven-page
letter from the Church of Scientology's
public affairs department putting 60
minutes on notice to use their words
they had no direct knowledge of what our
story was even about but somehow had
learned that Ron Miscavige was a part of
it
they accused us of inciting hate at the
very same time going out of their way to
smear on a former 42 year veteran of the
church always attack always attack
always attack never defend attack attack
attack if there's no evidence
manufacturer come up with something feed
lured sex blood crimes to the press that
is Scientology policy and that's what
they do
Mike Rinder knows because before he left
the church he was one of its most senior
enforces and spin-doctors today he's
joined forces with Hollywood actress and
former Scientologists Leah Remini to
call out the church on what it does to
people you're creating antisocial people
like psychotics because what what we
were behind the scenes is insane
as well as exposing the church Lea and
Mike are crusading for Shelley
Miscavige's freedoms they say she's been
locked away for more than a decade to
protect the church's secrets do you
believe that Shelly Miscavige is a
threat today oh absolutely yeah
absolutely she's seen it all she's been
by his side the whole time this is the
way the church deals with scrutiny
they're committing suppressive acts
intimidation vilification and cameras
are part of their well practice routine
to bully and harass people who deadly or
criticize Scientology and investigating
you on your actions against the Church
of Scientology our camera crew was
immediately in their sights
no respect just for filming one of their
buildings in Los Angeles you know this
is an our church is that normally the
way you treat people
still in the early stages of our story
and too soon to ask for official comment
we earned this angry attack why the
Church of Scientology media village
we won't why haven't you we well where
is Shelly Miscavige why haven't you
contacted media relations for the Church
of Scientology the question of where
Shelly Miscavige is goes unanswered by
this representative who also won't
identify herself you're creating threats
against very innocent wonderful people
but you won't even bother to contact the
Church of Scientology needed relations
I've told you she has a mantra but still
no answers and her next tactic is to get
personal here and making it seem dark
and mysterious now that does is you
create threats against us very innocent
people are you gonna do and like another
piece I heard about when you kidnapped
those two children is this good is that
how you're gonna do this are you that
dishonest the public face of Scientology
is far more benevolent selling itself
through celebrity glamour I'm part of a
frontier in a way you know that very few
people ever get to be part of its most
famous recruit is Hollywood's biggest
star Tom Cruise these are the times
were you there but this religion based
on self-help psychology was the 1950
creation of a mere mortal a science
fiction writer l ron Hubbard do you ever
think that you might be quite mad oh
yeah l ron Hubbard was the master of
making people believe the unbelievable
in return for vast sums of money he'd
convinced them to relinquish their
secrets through so-called auditing of
their emotions and experiences and then
after years of expensive courses he
would let them in on his sacred
scriptures that sent it around an alien
dictator called Xena when you do get to
that information about Xena at that
point do you start to question yes and
question yourselves that you've been
yeah when you get to those levels you
start to go this is this is all a lie
yeah it's pretty sad you spend your
whole life and you know some of us
millions of dollars some their life
savings co-star of hit sitcom King of
Queens Leah Remini was signed up to
Scientology by her mom when she was just
nine similarly Shelly Miscavige was
given into the sole care of l ron
Hubbard by her parents when she was 12
she had to sign a ludicrous billion-year
contract to work for almost nothing I
mean it's still going on today parents
are giving up their children to go join
this New York they think that's the most
important thing that they could do is to
give their children to Scientology could
you imagine that
no over my dead body
it was in the Sea Org that Shelley met
the young David Miscavige both so
devoted to l ron hubbard they were
Scientology's perfect power couple with
the death of Elrond David ultimately
assumed leadership and his wife Shelley
was second in charge they were the king
and queen of Scientology and then in
2005 Shelley disappeared so when did you
first ask where where are you where are
charms wedding in 2006 Tom Cruise's
wedding yet to Katie Holmes reserve
because she wasn't there which wasn't
there this is the Scientology was
calling it the wedding of the century it
would be really natural question to ask
wouldn't it
it was scatter scatter scatter never I
was standing by a fireplace and this big
castle and I'm like hey where's Shelley
and all the sudden everybody's Lea walks
away and I was like hey oh coming that
card you just you guys getting a drinker
Shelly Miscavige being missing it is
literally like suddenly Prince Phillip
shows up and there's no Queen I'm
serious I can't well I got biggest
events you know for the for the Queen's
birthday celebration there's Prince
Phillip and and Harry and Charles and no
Queen their account may be funny but the
simple question of where is Shelly
Miscavige brought with it a world of
pain for Lea she was summoned to
Scientology headquarters in Clearwater
Florida there she was forced to undergo
intense auditing for three to four
months for her crime the interrogation
all day all night
what are your evil intentions towards
mankind l ron Hubbard Tom Cruise and it
didn't end until I had to admit to
things that I didn't feel and until I
said Tom Cruise is an amazing
humanitarian as well David Miscavige and
they are that the only hope that man has
was I able to leave and that cost me
$300,000
yeah and I did it Tony is a gold bass as
benign as it looks so many nightmare
stories come out of this location but
longtime critic of the church Tony
Ortega says Shelly and David Miscavige
lived together in palatial comfort here
at the gold-based compound an
hour-and-a-half
east of La until 2005 it's believed that
summer while David was away Shelly
finished some outstanding administration
without her husband's approval that
action it seems sealed her fate he just
blows his stag and I've got eyewitnesses
to this thesis he had the biggest temper
tantrum of all time a week later she
vanished the fact that at the time no
one did ask where Shelly was including
her own father-in-law Ron Miscavige is a
chilling insight into the way David
Miscavige rules the church she
disappears from sight
did you ask David where she was your
daughter-in-law didn't listen you don't
ask Dave a question like that
you just wouldn't do it I could not say
to him or Shelly just wouldn't do it but
Ron is convinced Shelly is alive what do
you think her state of mind might be
resignation she has no hope whatever of
ever getting into good graces if Dave or
going for you none coming up calling for
answers will the church leader pick up
the phone I'd like to get through to
speak to my son plus a religion
by fear did David Miscavige ever meet
you
many times senator and haunted by
mystery we'd like to talk to you about
Shelly Miscavige
on 60 minutes I'd like to get through to
speak to David Miscavige that's my son
this is Ron Miscavige Ron Miscavige is
trying to reach his son the leader of
the Church of Scientology David
Miscavige do you think she's looking for
the number all this time no I think
she's gotten into a point of indecision
not knowing what to do today Ron is put
on hold for nearly five minutes before
being transferred to an answering
machine hey this is Ron Miscavige as
disappointing as this is for Ron it
comes as no real surprise you can get
through to David tell me give me a call
have a good day
Ron's been shunned by his son since he
left the church seven years ago I'm no
longer a person in his life I miss the
fact of the matter okay Godspeed
lightning speed enter it's a pattern
David Miscavige seems to have perfected
shunning not just his father but also
his wife Shelly Miscavige who vanished
thirteen years ago with Shelly's parents
did actress Leah Remini is taking action
to find her what do you think has
happened to Shelly I don't know I mean
that's why I filed a police report
missing persons report it's just no
you're not getting any answers we don't
have to answer you Shelly is fine and
she's alive and well and that's the PR
line and do you believe that line no I
don't
police say Leah's missing person report
was unfounded a finding she won't accept
Leah wants proof from the police they
met with Shelly proof from the church
that Shelly is okay do you believe she's
alive I hope so
as preposterous and shocking as the
Shelly Miscavige case may seem making
people disappear is not alien to this
so-called religion
here at the gold-based compound senior
executives of the church up to 120 at
one time were banished to a makeshift
prison called the hole for unknown
crimes and given sentences that seem
never-ending some of those executives
have been imprisoned now for 15 years
the whereabouts of others is still
unknown it really is quite unbelievable
there was no end there wasn't like you a
sentence for a week a sentence for a
month or until X Y & Z happens it was
just you went in there and then sort of
tried to figure out what you were
supposed to do in order to qualify to
get out the hole was two double-wide
trailers joined together with bars on
the windows and guards at the doors
those imprisoned were given slops to eat
the floor to sleep on and sometimes no
electricity physical abuse was also part
of the daily diet
despite his senior role as international
spokesperson for the church Mike Rinder
was sent there for two years did David
Miscavige ever beat you many many times
and what did you witness him beat others
many many many times I've seen David
Miscavige beat people up hundreds of
times does he have a conscience yeah you
know I really don't know and if I don't
know I guess he doesn't have one because
some of the things he does I couldn't do
having broken away Ron Miscavige and his
second wife Becky and now enemies of the
church which means under Scientology law
they've been cut off from their loved
ones who continue to follow the faith
you know I feel grief II because look I
lost my family it's like they're dead
did they're gone my two daughters my
grandchildren but to attain freedom it
was worth it because this church is not
a church it's a cult in every sense of
the word
Ron and Becky's escape from this cult is
an extraordinary story in itself
Scientology was their spiritual home for
42 years but in 2012 they knew they had
to get out
I was 76 years old and I'm the father of
the chairman of the board nobody thinks
I'm gonna escape that was the biggest
cover I had if they'd caught you trying
to escape you and your wife
what would they have done to you I would
have never gotten a sense if I'd have
been caught doing that then I would have
had a security guard watch me 24 hours a
day for the rest of my life it was
Sunday morning the 25th of March 2012
and with their bags secretly packed they
made a run for us my heart is in my
throat the gate opens as is Becky
returning left I turned left and stomped
my foot on the accelerator and when
we're getting close to Wisconsin Becky
called
she called her brother Donnie and she
said Donnie I'm coming home this is
terrible I'm sorry let me get composed
here and he said out loud he says
somebody get me a drink
Becky's on the way home said a moment of
joy
sorry that's all right
well why does it make you emotional do
you think fuck Eric so next question
coming up half a billion dollars worth
of property
Scientology's enormous wealth the
biggest single source of income for
Scientology in the world
name it could be the greatest kind
that's ever been practiced on the public
and could this be with Shelly Miscavige
is so that's just too frustrating I know
I was telling you we're gonna get very
close to her if she's in there that's
next on 60 minutes
Clearwater here we come yep
Clearwater is the biggest single source
of income for Scientology in the world
that makes Clearwater Florida
the Scientology tax-free capital of the
world as Australian and former
Scientologists mike rinder points out
the biggest and best buildings here
belong to the church worth almost half a
billion dollars and then of course we're
coming up to the big one which is they
call the super power building or the
flag building most guling the massive
investment seems to be a front most of
these buildings stand virtually empty in
this day and age who can afford half a
billion dollars worth of property to sit
effectively empty scientology care
scientology takes in enormous amounts of
cash and they don't like giving it away
they don't like spending it on the poor
but as a religion that has the privilege
of tax-free income Scientology is
required to give back to the community
the allegation is they say they do that
by providing services here but Mike
Rinder says those services are rarely
used in large part Scientology has
become a fundraising and real-estate
Empire rather than a spiritual religious
empire
mic and actress Leah Remini produce and
present Scientology and the aftermath an
emotional TV series exposing terrible
suffering at the hands of the church if
there is one thing that is the common
thread that we see throughout the the
stories of Scientology it's broken
families it's destroyed families people
who are being forced to disconnect from
other family members and that shouldn't
happen to anyone anywhere at any time
especially an organization calling
itself a religion the church would have
the world believe that Shelly Miscavige
has chosen to vanish I mean it's a
beautiful place were in here but author
attorney Ortega is adamant her
disappearance needs to be investigated
we're just a kilometer from the village
of Twin Peaks at the Church of spiritual
technology a secret arm of Scientology
which is guarded by cameras and high
fences it's here half a dozen devotees
are inscribing on titanium plates the
words of l ron Hubbard to preserve them
for the next six thousand years stored
in an underground bunker so it's not so
much about what they've got to hide but
what they've got to protect exactly
there's another camera there another one
there Tony Ortega says for different
people from within Scientology have told
him that this is where Shelly Miscavige
has been for the last 13 years leave
this building on the corner is the
residence of the person that runs this
facility okay and the one next to it may
be where Shelly lives just
yeah yeah right here well that's just
too frustrating like I know I was
telling you we're gonna get very close
to her if she's in there as we approach
the compound it's eerily quiet
with no one in sight there's certainly
no answer at the gate despite multiple
attempts to raise someone now they
wouldn't have abandoned the site with
them though they're in there and while
there are cars in the drive and lights
on it seems no one's home at the guard
station across the road either hello
we'd like to talk to you about Shelly
Miscavige hello if you can see us please
come out we'd like to talk to you so do
you think they know we're here
oh yeah of course they know there's
cameras on every square inch of this
place Shelly's supporters believe she's
now so indoctrinated and trained in the
ways of the church she would never leave
even if given the chance just seems like
an incredibly cruel thing to do it's I
just I don't I don't understand some of
the people that say well she's probably
okay I mean how do we know we don't know
it's incredible that this is going on in
the United States right now I just want
to know where Shelly with the Church of
Scientology I'll say it over and over
again do your job right I don't think
you'd actually give us an answer
if you try you might get someplace Wow
as promised we did contact the church
their representatives said our request
to interview David Miscavige was
preposterous a lawyer acting for Shelly
Miscavige told us she's not missing and
she's disgusted with Leah Remini for
suggesting she is you know of course
because you've heard it many times that
the heads of Scientology deny everything
you're saying
they say that you were never beaten
nobody ever beats you you were never
tortured you were never in the hole okay
you're yours but you know you're just
seeking publicity and you you're a
stalker of Shelly Miscavige right I you
know it's getting boring the this
response from Scientology and I'm gonna
say it I'll say it every time now cut
the bullshit if what we're saying is
untrue sue us me and Mike we're ready
for the lawsuit so that's what I keep
saying
we welcome you lawsuit we welcome
Ron Miscavige - says he will not be
cowered by the church or his son David
now that he's escaped Scientology he's
intent on warning others that this is
not a church but a con it could be the
greatest kind that's ever been practiced
on the public I'm not doing this for
pleasure I'm a musician I do that for
pleasure this I do out of duty I'm a
United States Marine veteran we don't
walk with our tail between our legs but
when your enemy is your son it must be a
very hard thing to do to talk about it
it's hard for me to do it but I'm not a
goddamn victim I'm doing something about
it
hello I'm Tara brown thanks for watching
to keep up with the latest from 60
minutes Australia make sure you
subscribe to our Channel you can also
download the 9 now app for full episodes
and other exclusive 60 minutes content